

===== PAGE 1 =====
SG-Splatting: Accelerating 3D Gaussian Splatting with Spherical Gaussians
Yiwen Wang1, Siyuan Chen 1, Ran Yi1
1Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wangyiwewn999@sjtu.edu.cn, gouliguojiashengsiyi@sjtu.edu.cn, ranyi@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting is emerging as a state-of-the-art tech-
nique in novel view synthesis, recognized for its impressive
balance between visual quality, speed, and rendering effi-
ciency. However, reliance on third-degree spherical harmon-
ics for color representation introduces significant storage de-
mands and computational overhead, resulting in a large mem-
ory footprint and slower rendering speed. We introduce SG-
Splatting with Spherical Gaussians based color representa-
tion, a novel approach to enhance rendering speed and qual-
ity in novel view synthesis. Our method first represents view-
dependent color using Spherical Gaussians, instead of three
degree spherical harmonics, which largely reduces the num-
ber of parameters used for color representation, and signif-
icantly accelerates the rendering process. We then develop
an efficient strategy for organizing multiple Spherical Gaus-
sians, optimizing their arrangement to achieve a balanced
and accurate scene representation. To further improve ren-
dering quality, we propose a mixed representation that com-
bines Spherical Gaussians with low-degree spherical harmon-
ics, capturing both high- and low-frequency color informa-
tion effectively. SG-Splatting also has plug-and-play capabil-
ity, allowing it to be easily integrated into existing systems.
This approach improves computational efficiency and over-
all visual fidelity, making it a practical solution for real-time
applications.
Introduction
Novel view synthesis is an important task in computer
graphics and vision, focusing on generating new perspec-
tives of a scene from a limited set of multi-view images.
This task addresses the challenge of creating realistic and
immersive novel view images without requiring extensive
data collection or manual modeling. The advent of 3D Gaus-
sian Splatting (Kerbl et al. 2023) has injected new momen-
tum into the field of novel view synthesis. Before the intro-
duction of 3D Gaussian Splatting, NeRF (Mildenhall et al.
2020) models, which rely on MLP for novel view synthesis,
were widely used but suffered from slow inference times and
lengthy training processes. In contrast, 3D Gaussian Splat-
ting leverages Gaussian splats to represent scene geometry
and appearance, offering significant improvements in ren-
dering speed, image quality, and training efficiency. This
approach effectively addresses the limitations of NeRF, pro-
viding a more practical and scalable solution for applica-
Figure 1: SG-Splatting: Spherical Gaussian-Based Splat-
ting. The top row presents comparisons of SG-Splatting and
3D-GS on rendering results and quantitative metrics on the
DeepBlending (Hedman et al. 2018) dataset, demonstrating
the ability to achieve rapid rendering. The bottom row pro-
vides zoom-in qualitative analysis of the rendered scenes,
highlighting how 3D-GS exhibits noticeable artifacts, which
are effectively minimized by our SG-Splatting approach.
tions requiring fast and high-quality view generation, such
as virtual reality (Jiang et al. 2024), 3D&4D content genera-
tion (Shao et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024), physical simulation
(Xie et al. 2023; Zhong et al. 2024) and autonomous driving
(Zhou et al. 2024).
Despite its advancements, 3D Gaussian Splatting faces
significant challenges that limit its broader application, par-
ticularly in real-time rendering environments. One of the pri-
mary limitations is its reliance on third-degree spherical har-
monics (SH) for color representation. While this approach
allows for detailed and accurate color expression, it comes
at the cost of a substantial memory footprint: each Gaus-
sian requires 48 SH coefficients, considering a scene with
millions of Gaussians, the total number of SH coefficients
is huge. The high storage requirements not only consume
a large amount of computational resources, but also restrict
the scalability of the technique in more complex or larger
scenes. Additionally, the use of spherical harmonics intro-
duces computational complexity that impacts the rendering
arXiv:2501.00342v1  [cs.CV]  31 Dec 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====
speed. The forward inference process requires considerable
calculations, leading to slower rendering times, which can
be a critical bottleneck in applications demanding real-time
performance.
To address the challenges posed by the large memory
footprint and slow rendering speed of 3D Gaussian Splat-
ting, several recent studies, including LightGaussian (Fan
et al. 2023) and Compact3D (Navaneet et al. 2023), have
focused on compressing the model size of 3D Gaussian
Splatting to make it more efficient. These approaches pri-
marily leverage traditional model compression techniques,
such as knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015) and vector quantization (Jacob et al. 2018), to reduce
the size of the model while attempting to maintain its visual
quality. While these methods have shown promise in reduc-
ing the computational demands of 3D Gaussian Splatting,
they overlooked the potential optimizations within the 3D
Gaussian Splatting representation itself, which could lead to
significant space compression and rendering acceleration.
Upon further investigation, we identified that the most sig-
nificant parameter overhead in 3D Gaussian Splatting stems
from the coefficients of the spherical harmonics used for
color representation. Specifically, the use of third-degree
spherical harmonics results in more than half of the model’s
parameters being allocated to storing these coefficients 1,
contributing to the substantial memory requirements and
computational burden. To address this issue, we propose
SG-Splatting with novel Spherical Gaussians based color
representation, which offers a more compact and effi-
cient representation. Firstly, we propose to represent view-
dependent color using Spherical Gaussians, instead of three-
degree SH, largely reducing the number of parameters re-
quired for color representation. Secondly, we propose the
use of multiple Spherical Gaussians of orthogonal orienta-
tions, to better simulate and optimize the scene, achieving a
balance between reduced parameter overhead and enhanced
rendering performance. Furthermore, we propose a mixed
color representation that combines Spherical Gaussians with
adaptive low-degree spherical harmonics, which combines
the advantages of SG in high-frequency color representa-
tion, and the advantages of low-degree SH in low-frequency
color representation, to further improve rendering quality.
This approach accelerates the rendering process, making it
more suitable for real-time applications.
Contributions of this paper can be summarized as:
• Spherical Gaussians based Color Representation: We
propose SG-Splatting, an innovative approach that rep-
resents view-dependent color using Spherical Gaussians,
instead of three-degree spherical harmonics, significantly
reducing the model’s parameter overhead and improving
computational efficiency.
• Effective Organization of Multiple Spherical Gaussians:
To further enhance the model’s performance, we develop
a method for the effective organization of multiple spher-
ical Gaussians, optimizing scene representation while
maintaining high visual fidelity.
1In 3D-GS, each Gaussian has 59 parameters for geometry and
texture representation, where 48 parameters are SH coefficients.
• Mixed Spherical Gaussians and low-degree spheri-
cal harmonics representation: We further propose a
mixed color representation that combines the advantages
of Spherical Gaussians in representing high-frequency
color and the advantages of low-degree spherical har-
monics in representing low-frequency color, to enhance
rendering quality.
• Plug-and-Play Capability: Our experiments show that
SG-Splatting can be seamlessly integrated into other ac-
celeration methods. This plug-and-play capability allows
our approach to enhance existing techniques, improving
rendering speed while maintaining output quality.
Related Works
Novel View Synthesis
Novel view synthesis (NVS) traditionally relies on
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) (Sch ¨onberger and Frahm
2016) and Multi-View Stereo (MVS) (Sch ¨onberger et al.
2016), where SfM reconstructs a scene’s 3D structure from
multiple images, providing the initial geometry for further
processing.
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2020)
brought a significant advancement to NVS by using a multi-
layer perceptron (MLP) for volumetric scene modeling,
though it suffers from slow training and rendering. Sub-
sequent methods like Mip-NeRF 360 (Barron et al. 2022)
improved image quality but at the cost of higher computa-
tional demands, while InstantNGP (M ¨uller et al. 2022) and
PlenOctree (Yu et al. 2021) focused on speeding up training
and rendering, respectively.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) has emerged
as a more efficient alternative for NVS, surpassing NeRF
in both speed and quality. By approximating radiance fields
with Gaussian components, 3D-GS enables real-time ren-
dering, making it a transformative development for novel
view synthesis.
3D-GS Fast Inference
As an explicit rendering method, the inference speed of 3D
Gaussian Splatting is closely related to the number of Gaus-
sians used. The inference process cost ϵ of 3D Gaussian
Splatting can be approximately quantified as:
ϵ = N × C, (1)
where N represents the total number of Gaussians in the
system, and C denotes the computational cost associated
with processing each individual Gaussian. This relationship
highlights the direct impact of the number of Gaussians on
the overall computational expense, emphasizing the impor-
tance of efficient representation and processing within the
3D Gaussian Splatting framework.
To accelerate inference process, GES (Hamdi et al. 2024)
reduces the number of Gaussians by optimizing Gaussian
expressions using generalized exponential functions. Light-
Gaussian (Fan et al. 2023) trims Gaussians based on their
importance, determined by factors like opacity and volume.
Compact3D (Navaneet et al. 2023) employs a learnable
mask to prune Gaussians effectively. Mini-splatting (Fang

===== PAGE 3 =====
and Wang 2024) decreases sampling points by incorporat-
ing depth estimation, While Eagles (Girish, Gupta, and Shri-
vastava 2023) and Compress3D (Niedermayr, Stumpfegger,
and Westermann 2023) use quantized methods to compress
attributes like color and direction of Gaussian primitives.
Although these methods have achieved notable success in
speeding up the rendering process, they have not directly
modified the most impactful component in Gaussian repre-
sentation, the spherical harmonics (SH).
Color Representation
In novel view synthesis and computer graphics, color rep-
resentation is crucial. Methods like NeRF use end-to-end
MLPs to learn color information, but this approach demands
significant computational resources, leading to long render-
ing times. To mitigate these challenges, SNeRG (Hedman
et al. 2021) separated appearance into diffuse and specu-
lar components, reducing reliance on large MLPs and cut-
ting down on inference time. Building on this, PlenOctree
(Yu et al. 2021) introduced spherical harmonics (SH) for
color representation, effectively approximating spherical fit-
ting and improving efficiency for scenes viewed from vari-
ous angles.
Other techniques, such as spherical functions (Wang et al.
2009; Xu et al. 2013) and wavelet transforms (Ng, Ra-
mamoorthi, and Hanrahan 2003), have also been explored
for color representation and storage. These methods effi-
ciently capture and compress color information while pre-
serving detail, enabling faster rendering and reduced storage
requirements.
In comparison, Spherical Gaussians (SG) are the most
flexible and computationally lightweight option. With fewer
parameters and simpler computations, SGs are ideal for ac-
celerating rendering while maintaining high quality, making
them well-suited for novel view synthesis.
Methods
Overview
The original 3D Gaussian Splatting system, due to its re-
liance on three degree spherical harmonics, requires a large
number of parameters to store the spherical harmonic coef-
ficients. This results in a significant increase in the model’s
memory usage and also adversely affects the forward render-
ing speed. We propose SG-Splatting, a novel 3D Gaussian
Splatting technique designed to overcome the limitations of
traditional spherical harmonics by using Spherical Gaus-
sians (SG) based color representation .
As shown in Fig. 2, our SG-Splatting framework builds
upon 3D-GS by incorporating Sperical Gaussians to form a
more compact color representation. The inputs and output
of our system are the same as original 3D-GS: The inputs
consists of multi-view scene images and their corresponding
camera parameters, and the output is the final rendered im-
age of the scene. The process begins by using the multi-view
images to generate an initial point cloud by SfM. This point
cloud is then used to initialize elliptical Gaussians, which
represent the scene’s geometry and color, where the color
adopts our SG-based representation. These elliptical Gaus-
sians are optimized by minimizing the loss between the ren-
dered image and the ground truth, using alpha blending to
produce the final scene renderings.
Different from original 3D-GS that uses three degree
spherical harmonics (SH) for color representation, to en-
hance rendering quality while maintaining efficiency, we
further propose a mixed color representation that com-
bines Spherical Gaussians and adaptive low-degree
spherical harmonics. 1) The high-frequency color compo-
nent is represented using Spherical Gaussians, which is more
compact than SH, and excels at representing high-frequency
color components, to capture fine lighting and shading de-
tails. Using single SG requires only 7 parameters to repre-
sent view-dependent color, much fewer than 45 parameters
required by three-degree SH. Furthermore, we propose to
use multiple SGs of orthogonal orientations to complement
each other and improve the modeling of color and light. This
orthogonal arrangement ensures that each Gaussian can ef-
fectively represent distinct aspects of the scene’s color and
light, minimizing redundancy and improving the overall ren-
dering quality. 2) Meanwhile, the low-frequency color com-
ponent is initially expressed using a simple 3-dimensional
diffuse color (the zero degree SH component), with the op-
tion to replace this with adaptive low-degree SH (0-2 degree)
for a better balance between rendering speed and quality.
Although using low-degree SH alongside Spherical Gaus-
sians may slightly reduce rendering speed, it significantly
improves the overall rendering quality, making this trade-off
beneficial for scenarios where visual fidelity is a priority.
Preliminaries
3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) is an explicit method for
modeling scenes in novel view synthesis using a set of 3D
Gaussian ellipsoilds with geometric and texture properties.
The geometry of each Gaussian is parameterized by its
center position X and a covariance matrix Σ. The covari-
ance matrix defines the shape, size, and orientation of the
Gaussian, allowing it to model the spatial distribution of the
data.Therefore, given a pointx in the 3D space, the Gaussian
function is defined as:
G(x) = e− 1
2 (x−X)T Σ−1(x−X), (2)
where the covariance matrix is typically decomposed into
a rotation matrix R (represented by a quaternion q) and a
scaling matrix S (represented by a scaling vector s). This
decomposition ensures that the Gaussian primitives are ap-
propriately oriented and scaled in the 3D space:
Σ = RSS T RT . (3)
The texture information of each Gaussian consists of
opacity σ and spherical harmonics (to represent color). For
rendering, the 3D Gaussian primitives are first projected into
2D space from a given viewpoint (Zwicker et al. 2002).
Once projected, the overlapping splats are accumulated and
blended to create the final image.
Spherical Harmonics (SH). To achieve high-quality ren-
dering, particularly in capturing complex lighting and shad-

===== PAGE 4 =====
Loss
Backward processForward process
Multi Spherical Gaussians(w/orientationconstraints)xσcolorqs
AdaptiveLow-Degree Spherical Harmonics
Initialization3D Gaussian PrimitiveSfMPoints
Splatting
Render2D Splat
Gaussian AttributesRender
Render
ColorRepresentation
Figure 2: Our SG-Splatting framework for novel view synthesis. The process begins with multi-view images and corresponding
camera views, which are used to initialize Gaussian primitives through SfM. These primitives are characterized by their posi-
tions, covariance matrices, opacity and color information. High-frequency color components are represented using Spherical
Gaussians (SGs) to accurately capture view-dependent effects, while low-frequency color components are supplemented using
diffuse or adaptive low-degree Spherical Harmonics (SH) to provide a smooth and consistent representation. The final rendered
output is compared with the ground truth to evaluate the method performance.
ing effects, 3D-GS utilizes three degree spherical harmon-
ics (SH) to represent the scene’s color. Spherical harmon-
ics have components that carry specific physical meanings,
stemming from their mathematical origins in solving the an-
gular part of Laplace’s equation in spherical coordinates.
These components are particularly useful in representing an-
gular functions and capturing the directional properties of
light and sound in various physical systems. Specifically,
3D-GS uses the following formula to represent color by SH:
c(v) =
LX
l=0
lX
m=−l
clmYlm(v), (4)
where v is the input viewing direction, c(v) is the color ob-
served from that direction, clm is the spherical harmonic co-
efficient, and Ylm(v) is the spherical harmonic basis func-
tion of degree l and order m. The sum is taken over all de-
grees l and orders m up to a specified levelL = 3, capturing
the complexity of the color variations.
Each SH has a fixed and distinct shape. For a given spher-
ical function, these SHs need to be combined and their coef-
ficients adjusted to accurately fit the function. This process
involves fine-tuning each coefficient to capture the specific
features and details of the spherical function being repre-
sented. However, for three degree SH, the entire 3D-GS sys-
tem requires 16 SH coefficients for each color channel, and
48 SH coefficients in total. This results in a significant in-
crease in the model’s parameter count, contributing to the
substantial memory overhead and computational complex-
ity associated with the system.
Spherical Gaussian based Color Representation
To address the inefficiencies associated with spherical har-
monics, i.e., requiring 48 SH coefficients for color represen-
tation, we propose to use Spherical Gaussians for color rep-
resentation. Spherical Gaussians are more lightweight and
flexible than spherical harmonics, primarily because they re-
quire fewer parameters (10 compared to 48 of SH) and can
be easily adjusted to point in specific orientations.
Background on Spherical Gaussians (SG). As shown
in Figure 3, the geometric shape of Spherical Gaussians re-
sembles lobes, allowing for more precise control of light and
color representation in different directions. Different from
spherical harmonics (SH) that have fixed shapes and cannot
be adjusted in form or position, Spherical Gaussians (SG)
offer flexibility in that: the orientation of lobe can be arbi-
trarily adjusted by paramter µ, and the sharpness of lobe can
be controlled by parameter λ (see visualizations of different
µ and λ in Figure 3). This ability to dynamically adjust both
orientation and sharpness gives Spherical Gaussians a dis-
tinct advantage in rendering applications, allowing for more
accurate and versatile representations.
SG-based Color Representation. Based on Spherical
Gaussians, the color C of each Gaussian is represented as:
C(d; α, λ, µ) = αeλ(d·µ−1), (5)
where d is the direction of the view,λ controls the sharpness
of the lobe, α represents the coefficients for the three color
channels, and µ denotes the orientation of the lobe’s peak.
A larger value of λ results in a more concentrated lobe, in-
creasing the sharpness of the effect.
To further enhance the accuracy of color representation,
we decompose the color into two components: diffuse, and
view-dependent. The diffuse component captures the inher-
ent color of the surface that is independent of the viewing
angle; while the view-dependent component captures effects
such as specular highlights, which vary depending on the

===== PAGE 5 =====
Figure 3: Visualization of Spherical Gaussians (SG) and how
variations in µ and λ affect the orientation and sharpness of
SG. Comparing the top and bottom row highlights the differ-
ences in µ, which changes the orientation of the SG. Com-
paring from left to right illustrates the effect of sharpness λ;
as λ increases, the SG becomes more concentrated, resulting
in a sharper peak.
viewer’s position relative to the light source. Therefore, the
color is represented as:
C(d; α, λ, µ) = D + αeλ(d·µ−1), (6)
where diffuse component D, and coefficients of each color
channel α are 3-dimensional vectors, orientation of Spheri-
cal Gaussian lobe’s peakµ is also 3-dimensional, and sharp-
ness of Spherical Gaussian lobe λ is a scalar. Therefore, un-
der SG-based representation, each Gaussian requires only10
parameters (3 for diffuse, 7 for SG) to represent color. This
is significantly fewer than the number of parameters ( 48)
needed for each Gaussian under three degree SH-based color
representation. This reduction in parameter count highlights
the efficiency of Spherical Gaussians, making them a much
more compact and computationally efficient alternative, and
allows for faster rendering and training speeds.
Multi-Axis Orthogonal Gaussians
While a single Spherical Gaussian significantly enhances
rendering speed, it can face challenges in handling complex
lighting scenarios, which may result in some limitations in
rendering quality. To address this issue, we employ multi-
ple Spherical Gaussians to improve the modeling of color
and light, where multiple Spherical Gaussians have differ-
ent orientations and complement each other.
However, simply accumulating multiple Spherical Gaus-
sians led to suboptimal results (Fig. 4 third column). The
primary issue was that the Gaussians failed to distribute the
scene’s content effectively, resulting in clustering that fur-
ther degraded the rendering quality. Spherical Gaussians can
have arbitrary orientations of lobe (defined by µ), which
make them more flexible, but more difficult to control and
combine. E.g., in some scenes, without constraints on orien-
tations of lobe, multiple Spherical Gaussians may be influ-
enced by strong specular highlights in a certain orientation,
and be optimized to similar orientations, failing to achieve
the goal of complementarity.
Multiple Orthogonal SGs. To address this limitation, we
introduce multiple orthogonal Spherical Gaussians, where
the orientations ( µ) of multiple gaussians are orthogonal
to each other. This orthogonal arrangement allows different
Spherical Gaussians to complement one another more effec-
tively, ensuring better alignment and coherence in the rep-
resentation. As a result, this approach enhances rendering
quality by maintaining a more structured and comprehen-
sive depiction of the scene’s color and light (Fig. 4 fourth
column).
Each orthogonal direction acts as a basis vector. By using
these orthogonal directions, we achieve a more structured
representation of the scene’s color and light, reducing the
likelihood of clustering and ultimately leading to improved
rendering results. Specifically, the colorC is represented as:
C(d; α, λ) = D +
3X
i=1
αieλi(d·µi−1), (7)
µi · µj =
1, if i = j,
0, if i ̸= j. (8)
Although introducing multiple Spherical Gaussians in-
creases the number of parameters, this increase is minimized
by using orthogonal axes. Each Spherical Gaussian aligned
along orthogonal axes requires 4 parameters—coefficients
for color α and sharpness λ. Additionally, 3 extra parame-
ters are needed to define the orthogonal directions µ, result-
ing in a total of 15 parameters for 3 orthogonal SGs. This is
still far fewer than the48 parameters needed for third-degree
spherical harmonics. This approach ensures that the multiple
SGs complement each other effectively, optimizing the over-
all representation while keeping the increase in complexity
minimal. Moreover, our experiments show that the specific
directions of the orthogonal axes are not crucial; the key is
maintaining their orthogonality, which simplifies implemen-
tation (see Supplementary material for experimental details).
Mixing Spherical Harmonics and Spherical
Gaussians
While the use of multiple Spherical Gaussians significantly
accelerates the 3D Gaussian Splatting process, it can lead
to some loss in rendering quality due to compressed color
paramters. To address this and further enhance the render-
ing quality, we incorporate adaptive low-degree spherical
harmonics (0-2 degree) along with Spherical Gaussians for
color representation.
Specifically, we adaptively adjust the degree used for SH
based on the size of Gaussians. According to statistics on
Gaussian radius (detailed in Supplementary material), we
observed that most Gaussians in the scene are small. For
small Gaussians, their coverage area is limited, and they do
not exhibit significant view-dependent changes, mainly con-
taining low-frequency color information. As a result, there
is no need to use high-degree spherical harmonics (SH) to
fit them, and lower-degree SH is sufficient to capture their
characteristics effectively. For these smaller Gaussians, we

===== PAGE 6 =====
Ground Truth
3Spherical Gaussiansw/o orientation constraints
1Spherical Gaussian
3Spherical Gaussians withorientation constraints
Ours full(3SGsw/constraints&adaptivelow-degreeSH)
Figure 4: Comparison of rendering results using different numbers of Spherical Gaussians (SGs). Using 3 SGs without ori-
entation constraints can lead to inaccuracies ( e.g., incorrectly brightening shadowed areas), while with orthogonal orientation
constraints, the rendering quality is improved. Ours full further integrates adaptive low-degree SH for better rendering quality.
calculate their size based on the matrix of their 2D projec-
tion, and dynamically choose to use 0th, 1st, or 2nd degree
spherical harmonics according to their sizes. While for large
Gaussians that are of a small proportion, we use 2nd de-
gree spherical harmonics. This adaptive approach allows us
to achieve a balance between rendering speed and quality,
ensuring that each Gaussian is represented with the appro-
priate level of detail:
C(d; α, λ) = SH + αeλ(d·µ−1). (9)
Experiments
Experiment Settings
Datasets and Metrics. We conduct our experiments on
three commonly used datasets: Mip-NeRF360 (Barron et al.
2022), Tanks&Temples (Knapitsch et al. 2017), and Deep-
Blending (Hedman et al. 2018).
To evaluate SG-Splatting, we use several metrics. Qual-
ity is measured using PSNR, SSIM (Wang et al. 2004),
and LPIPS (Zhang et al. 2018), which assess image fi-
delity, structural similarity, and perceptual quality, respec-
tively. Rendering speed is measured in FPS, indicating the
method’s efficiency in real-time applications. We also report
training time to measure computational efficiency.
All experiments are conducted on an NVIDIA RTX 3090
GPU to ensure fairness and avoid performance variations
due to hardware differences.
Implementation. The learning rate hyperparameters for
training are consistent with those used in 3D-GS to ensure
fair comparison. The total number of training iterations is set
to 30,000. After the initial 2,000 iterations, Spherical Gaus-
sians are introduced into the training process with a learning
rate of 0.0025. This staged introduction helps in gradually
refining the model’s ability to capture complex lighting and
shading effects, leading to improved rendering quality. For
multiple orthogonal SGs, in our experiments, based on ob-
servations that the specific directions of orthogonal axes are
not crucial while the key is the orthogonality (see experi-
ments in Supplementary material), we selected the orthogo-
nal axes as (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), and (0, 0, 1) for ease of imple-
mentation.
Comparisons
Baselines. We compare SG-Splatting with two groups of
baseline methods. 1) The first group includes original 3D-
GS, Compact3D (Navaneet et al. 2023) and Eagles (Girish,
Gupta, and Shrivastava 2023), which primarily focus on
post-processing trained models through model compression
techniques to reduce the number of Gaussian primitives and
improve efficiency. 2) The second group, including Mini-
splatting (Fang and Wang 2024) and GES (Hamdi et al.
2024), optimizes the 3D-GS model and training process to
enhance rendering quality and speed. Our SG-Splatting can
be seamlessly integrated into these approaches, offering ad-
ditional improvements in efficiency.
Results and Analysis
Table 1 presents a comprehensive comparison, including the
performance of our SG-Splatting, and the effects of inte-
grating SG-Splatting into other existing approaches. Fig. 5
shows the qualitative comparison results. In comparison
with the first group of baselines, our method achieves the
fastest rendering speed, 1.4 ∼ 1.5 times faster than orig-
inal 3D-GS; with rendering quality slightly lower than
the original 3D-GS, but consistently outperforming other
compression-based post-processing methods, particularly in
the most complex scenes from Mip-NeRF360. In the second
group of baselines, after integrating our SG-based color rep-
resentation into these methods (Mini-splatting and GES), we
observe a significant improvement in rendering speed across
most scenes, with only a minor reduction in rendering qual-
ity. This demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach in
improving efficiency while maintaining high visual fidelity.
Furthermore, SG-Splatting demonstrates a storage size re-
duction of approximately 46.7% ∼ 47.3% between datasets
compared to 3D Gaussian Splatting, further enhancing its
practicality for memory-constrained environments.
Ablation Studies
We conducted ablation studies by progressively adding our
components to the base 3D-GS model to evaluate their im-
pact (Table 2 and Fig. 4). Specifically, we tested the effects
on rendering speed, rendering quality, and model size, eval-
uating how each component contributes to overall perfor-
mance.
3DGS + Multi-Axis Orthogonal SG: Introducing orthog-
onal SGs achieves a significant improvement in rendering
speed and model size, at the cost of a slight decrease in
rendering quality. Specifically, the rendering speed increases
from 247 to 371 FPS, while the model size is reduced from
781.46 to 364.01 MB. Although there is a minor drop in
PSNR (from 27.410 to 26.845) and SSIM (from 0.814 to
0.803), the trade-off results in a much more efficient model.

===== PAGE 7 =====
GroundTruthOurs3D-GSMini-splattingGes-splatting
Compact3DEAGLES
Figure 5: Qualitative comparison of our SG-Splatting with baseline methods.
Dataset Mip-NeRF360 Tanks&Temples DeepBlending
Matrices PSNR↑ SSIM↑ LPIPS↓ FPS↑ Train↓ PSNR↑ SSIM↑ LPIPS↓ FPS↑ Train↓ PSNR↑ SSIM↑ LPIPS↓ FPS↑ Train↓
3D-GS 27.401 0.814 0.217 247 25min29s 23.728 0.845 0.179 312 14min40s 29.508 0.900 0.247 233 24min18s
Compact3D 26.969 0.797 0.245 293 35min41s23.323 0.831 0.202 383 20min41s29.749 0.901 0.259 331 19min50s
EAGLES 27.140 0.805 0.239 155 21min55s 23.342 0.836 0.200 245 11min22s29.951 0.907 0.249 156 19min41s
SG-Splatting27.267 0.813 0.218 334 24min11s23.465 0.840 0.188 472 13min21s 29.5700.901 0.247 344 22min25s
Mini-splatting27.345 0.822 0.217 576 21min17s 23.259 0.836 0.202 685 14min12s 29.962 0.908 0.248 656 18min15s
SG-mini-Splatting26.933 0.835 0.222 681 21min05s 23.036 0.833 0.205 861 12min37s 29.9160.908 0.253 773 17min40s
GES 26.901 0.794 0.252 421 20min14s 23.414 0.837 0.198 518 11min02s 29.628 0.901 0.252 398 19min04s
SG-GES 26.703 0.791 0.260 520 17min58s 23.234 0.832 0.202 626 10min01s29.704 0.902 0.251 488 17min37s
Table 1: Detailed comparison of our SG-Splatting with 3D-GS and other baseline methods across various datasets. In com-
parison with the first group of baselines, we achieve the fastest rendering speed; and in the second group of baselines, after
integrating our SG-Splatting into Mini-splatting and GES, the rendering speed is further improved, showing that our approach
enhances efficieny while maintaining high visual quality. The best and second best scrores in each group are highlighted in
yellow and pink .
Ablation Setup PSNR↑ SSIM↑ LPIPS↓ FPS↑ Size(MB)↓
3D Gaussian Splatting27.410 0.814 0.217 247 781.46
3DGS+Multi-Axis Orthogonal SG26.845 0.803 0.229 371 364.013DGS + Low Degree SH27.206 0.812 0.219 341 517.453DGS+Multi-Axis Orthogonal SG+Mix SH (Ours)27.267 0.813 0.218 334 416.02
Table 2: Ablation studies on the Mip-NeRF360 dataset.
Dataset Mip-NeRF360 Tanks&Temples DeepBlending
3D Gaussian Splatting781.46 434.10 662.26
SG-Splatting 416.02 228.78 357.45
Table 3: Comparison of storage size (in MB) for 3D Gaus-
sian Splatting and SG-Splatting.
The orthogonal arrangement of the SGs still captures the de-
tails of the scene effectively, enabling faster rendering and
better storage efficiency.
3DGS + Low Degree SH:To rigorously evaluate the effec-
tiveness of spherical Gaussians (SG), we also conducted ex-
periments using low-degree spherical harmonics (SH). This
setup simplifies the representation, achieving a moderate im-
provement in rendering speed (341 FPS compared to the
original 247 FPS) and a reduction in model size to 517.45
MB.
3DGS + Multi-Axis Orthogonal SG + Mix SH (Ours):
In this configuration, we combine the advantages of low-
degree spherical harmonics (SH) and spherical Gaussians
(SG) to achieve a balanced trade-off between rendering
quality, speed, and model size. Compared to the original
3D-GS, our method maintains comparable rendering qual-
ity (PSNR: 27.267 vs. 27.410, SSIM: 0.813 vs. 0.814)
while significantly improving efficiency. Specifically, our
method achieves a higher rendering speed (334 FPS com-
pared to 247 FPS) and a notably smaller model size (416.02
MB compared to 781.46 MB). Using the complementary
strengths of SG and low-degree SH, this approach pro-
vides an effective solution for scenarios requiring both high-
performance and compact model storage.

===== PAGE 8 =====
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose SG-Splatting, a 3D Gaussian
Splatting technique designed to address the limitations of
3D Gaussian Splatting, especially the excessive number
of third-degree spherical harmonic coefficients that hinders
rendering speed. Our approach utilizes Spherical Gaussians
for a more compact color representation, to mitigate the is-
sues of coefficient overload and slow inference times. Ad-
ditionally, we incorporate multiple Spherical Gaussians and
mix them with adaptive low-degree spherical harmonics to
enhance rendering quality while maintaining fast rendering
speeds. Moreover, SG-Splatting is designed to be plug-and-
play, allowing it to be easily integrated into other accelera-
tion techniques without compromising performance.
References
Barron, J. T.; Mildenhall, B.; Verbin, D.; Srinivasan, P. P.;
and Hedman, P. 2022. Mip-NeRF 360: Unbounded Anti-
Aliased Neural Radiance Fields. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 5470–5479.
Fan, Z.; Wang, K.; Wen, K.; Zhu, Z.; Xu, D.; and Wang, Z.
2023. LightGaussian: Unbounded 3D Gaussian Compres-
sion with 15x Reduction and 200+ FPS. arXiv:2311.17245.
Fang, G.; and Wang, B. 2024. Mini-Splatting: Represent-
ing Scenes with a Constrained Number of Gaussians. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.14166.
Girish, S.; Gupta, K.; and Shrivastava, A. 2023. Eagles: Ef-
ficient accelerated 3d gaussians with lightweight encodings.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04564.
Hamdi, A.; Melas-Kyriazi, L.; Mai, J.; Qian, G.; Liu, R.;
V ondrick, C.; Ghanem, B.; and Vedaldi, A. 2024. GES
: Generalized Exponential Splatting for Efficient Radiance
Field Rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,
19812–19822.
Hedman, P.; Philip, J.; Price, T.; Frahm, J.-M.; Drettakis, G.;
and Brostow, G. 2018. Deep Blending for Free-viewpoint
Image-based Rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia), 37(6): 257:1–257:15.
Hedman, P.; Srinivasan, P. P.; Mildenhall, B.; Barron, J. T.;
and Debevec, P. 2021. Baking Neural Radiance Fields for
Real-Time View Synthesis. ICCV.
Hinton, G.; Vinyals, O.; and Dean, J. 2015. Distill-
ing the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1503.02531.
Jacob, B.; Kligys, S.; Chen, B.; Zhu, M.; Tang, M.; Howard,
A.; Adam, H.; and Kalenichenko, D. 2018. Quantization and
training of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-
only inference. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2704–
2713.
Jiang, Y .; Yu, C.; Xie, T.; Li, X.; Feng, Y .; Wang, H.; Li,
M.; Lau, H.; Gao, F.; Yang, Y .; and Jiang, C. 2024. VR-GS:
A Physical Dynamics-Aware Interactive Gaussian Splatting
System in Virtual Reality.arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.16663.
Kerbl, B.; Kopanas, G.; Leimk ¨uhler, T.; and Drettakis, G.
2023. 3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time Radiance Field
Rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 42(4): 139:1–
139:14.
Knapitsch, A.; Park, J.; Zhou, Q.-Y .; and Koltun, V . 2017.
Tanks and Temples: Benchmarking Large-Scale Scene Re-
construction. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 36(4): 78:1–
78:13.
Mildenhall, B.; Srinivasan, P. P.; Tancik, M.; Barron, J. T.;
Ramamoorthi, R.; and Ng, R. 2020. NeRF: Representing
Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for View Synthesis. In
European Conference on Computer Vision, 405–421.
M¨uller, T.; Evans, A.; Schied, C.; and Keller, A. 2022.
Instant Neural Graphics Primitives with a Multiresolution
Hash Encoding. ACM Trans. Graph., 41(4): 102:1–102:15.
Navaneet, K.; Meibodi, K. P.; Koohpayegani, S. A.; and Pir-
siavash, H. 2023. Compact3D: Compressing Gaussian Splat
Radiance Field Models with Vector Quantization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.18159.
Ng, R.; Ramamoorthi, R.; and Hanrahan, P. 2003. All-
frequency shadows using non-linear wavelet lighting ap-
proximation. ACM Trans. Graph., 22(3): 376–381.
Niedermayr, S.; Stumpfegger, J.; and Westermann, R. 2023.
Compressed 3D Gaussian Splatting for Accelerated Novel
View Synthesis. arXiv:2401.02436.
Sch¨onberger, J. L.; and Frahm, J.-M. 2016. Structure-from-
Motion Revisited. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,
4104–4113.
Sch¨onberger, J. L.; Zheng, E.; Pollefeys, M.; and Frahm, J.-
M. 2016. Pixelwise View Selection for Unstructured Multi-
View Stereo. In European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV).
Shao, R.; Sun, J.; Peng, C.; Zheng, Z.; Zhou, B.; Zhang, H.;
and Liu, Y . 2024. Control4D: Efficient 4D Portrait Editing
with Text. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Wang, J.; Ren, P.; Gong, M.; Snyder, J.; and Guo, B. 2009.
All-frequency rendering of dynamic, spatially-varying re-
flectance. ACM Trans. Graph., 28(5): 1–10.
Wang, Z.; Bovik, A.; Sheikh, H.; and Simoncelli, E. 2004.
Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural
similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 13(4):
600–612.
Xie, T.; Zong, Z.; Qiu, Y .; Li, X.; Feng, Y .; Yang, Y .;
and Jiang, C. 2023. PhysGaussian: Physics-Integrated
3D Gaussians for Generative Dynamics. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.12198.
Xu, K.; Sun, W.-L.; Dong, Z.; Zhao, D.-Y .; Wu, R.-D.; and
Hu, S.-M. 2013. Anisotropic Spherical Gaussians. ACM
Transactions on Graphics, 32(6): 209:1–209:11.
Yang, Z.; Yang, H.; Pan, Z.; and Zhang, L. 2024. Real-time
Photorealistic Dynamic Scene Representation and Render-
ing with 4D Gaussian Splatting. InInternational Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR).

===== PAGE 9 =====
Yu, A.; Li, R.; Tancik, M.; Li, H.; Ng, R.; and Kanazawa, A.
2021. PlenOctrees for Real-time Rendering of Neural Radi-
ance Fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 5752–5761.
Zhang, R.; Isola, P.; Efros, A. A.; Shechtman, E.; and Wang,
O. 2018. The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep Features
as a Perceptual Metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,
586–595.
Zhong, L.; Yu, H.-X.; Wu, J.; and Li, Y . 2024. Reconstruc-
tion and Simulation of Elastic Objects with Spring-Mass
3D Gaussians. European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV).
Zhou, X.; Lin, Z.; Shan, X.; Wang, Y .; Sun, D.; and Yang,
M.-H. 2024. DrivingGaussian: Composite Gaussian Splat-
ting for Surrounding Dynamic Autonomous Driving Scenes.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 21634–21643.
Zwicker, M.; Pfister, H.; van Baar, J.; and Gross, M. 2002.
EW A Splatting. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 8(3): 223–238.
Reproducibility Checklist
1. This paper:
• Includes a conceptual outline and/or pseudocode de-
scription of AI methods introduced (yes)
• Clearly delineates statements that are opinions, hy-
pothesis, and speculation from objective facts and re-
sults (yes)
• Provides well marked pedagogical references for less-
familiare readers to gain background necessary to
replicate the paper (yes)
2. Does this paper make theoretical contributions? (yes)
If yes, please complete the list below.
• All assumptions and restrictions are stated clearly and
formally. (yes)
• All novel claims are stated formally. (yes)
• Proofs of all novel claims are included. (yes)
• Proof sketches or intuitions are given for complex
and/or novel results. (yes)
• Appropriate citations to theoretical tools used are
given. (yes)
• All theoretical claims are demonstrated empirically to
hold. (yes)
• All experimental code used to eliminate or disprove
claims is included. (yes)
3. Does this paper rely on one or more datasets? (yes)
If yes, please complete the list below.
• A motivation is given for why the experiments are con-
ducted on the selected datasets. (yes)
• All novel datasets introduced in this paper are included
in a data appendix. (NA)
• All novel datasets introduced in this paper will be
made publicly available upon publication of the pa-
per with a license that allows free usage for research
purposes. (NA)
• All datasets drawn from the existing literature (po-
tentially including authors’ own previously published
work) are accompanied by appropriate citations. (yes)
• All datasets drawn from the existing literature (po-
tentially including authors’ own previously published
work) are publicly available. (yes)
• All datasets that are not publicly available are de-
scribed in detail, with explanation why publicly avail-
able alternatives are not scientifically satisficing. (NA)
4. Does this paper include computational experiments?
(yes)
If yes, please complete the list below.
• Any code required for pre-processing data is included
in the appendix. (yes)
• All source code required for conducting and analyzing
the experiments is included in a code appendix. (yes)
• All source code required for conducting and analyzing
the experiments will be made publicly available upon
publication of the paper with a license that allows free
usage for research purposes. (yes)
• All source code implementing new methods have com-
ments detailing the implementation, with references to
the paper where each step comes from. (yes)
• If an algorithm depends on randomness, then the
method used for setting seeds is described in a way
sufficient to allow replication of results. (NA)
• This paper specifies the computing infrastructure used
for running experiments (hardware and software), in-
cluding GPU/CPU models; amount of memory; oper-
ating system; names and versions of relevant software
libraries and frameworks. (partial)
• This paper states the number of algorithm runs used to
compute each reported result. (yes)
• Analysis of experiments goes beyond single-
dimensional summaries of performance (e.g., average;
median) to include measures of variation, confidence,
or other distributional information. (no)
• The significance of any improvement or decrease in
performance is judged using appropriate statistical
tests (e.g., Wilcoxon signed-rank). (no)
• This paper lists all final (hyper-)parameters used for
each model/algorithm in the paper’s experiments.
(yes)
• This paper states the number and range of values tried
per (hyper-) parameter during development of the pa-
per, along with the criterion used for selecting the final
parameter setting. (partial)